# Data cache

Until now, we've only worked with "hard coded" components, no external API's. Why? Because of `Next` `data cache`.

`Data cache` allows the result of external requests (using `fetch`) to be stored on the server. It also handles revalidation of this data. So, instead of making a request twice, the second request would just return the cached result of the first one. Of course, you can always opt out and force a fresh request every time.

The problem is, `data cache` and `full route cache` are intertwined. They alter each others behaviour and it can become tricky to know what's happening or who's doing what. The goal of this chapter is to clear the fogg.

## cache options

`Next` extends the native `fetch` api with options. One of these options is `cache`:

```tsx
fetch('url', { cache: '...' });
```

There are 3 options:

1. {} (auto option) -> does not cache
2. { cache: "no-store" } -> does not cache
3. { cache: "force-cache" } -> caches

From before we know that a route becomes dynamically rendered when `Next` encounters a dynamic element: `cookies`, `headers`, `collection`, `draftmode`, `searchParams` page prop or the dynamic fetch: { cache: "no-store" }.

So, out of our 3 options above, the dynamic fetch: { cache: "no-store" }, will make the route dynamic. The other 2 will not.

### 1. {} auto

Omitting the cache property is called the `auto` option and the fetch result will not be cached. The `auto` option does not opt the route into dynamic rendering.

- `auto` option + static route: `Next` will - at `build time` - make the fetch, render the result into `html` and `rsc`. The route is cached, the result is not (no `data cache`). `Next` serves the `html` and `rsc` but never makes the fetch again.
- `auto` option + dynamic route: `Next` will - at `request time` - make the fetch, render the result into `html` and `rsc` but not cache the fetch result. For each request, the fetch will be made and the route will be rendered (into `html` and `rsc`).

This is as expected. The `auto` option does not interfere with static or dynamic rendering, they behave normally. When a route is static, it remains static, when a route is dynamic it remains dynamic. In a static route, the fetch is made only once at `build time`. In a dynamic route, the fetch is made for each request, at `request time`. The fetch result is never cached.

### 2. { cache: "no-store" }

Setting a fetch with `no-store` in `Next` is called a dynamic fetch. Data will never be cached, we always want fresh data. You can also use `no-cache`. It has the same result in `Next`.

A dynamic fetch is a dynamic element, meaning it turns your route into dynamic rendering: `server-side` at `request time`. So, when using `no-store` a route can never be static: no prerendered `html` or `rsc` at build time. The route is skipped and only rendered at `request time`. So, opting out of `data cache`, also opts you out of the `full route cache`.

This makes sense, when you always want fresh data, you cannot prerender it in advance, only "now", at `request time`.

### 3. { cache: "force-cache" }

Setting cache to `force-cache` means that `Next` will use the cache as much as possible. When using `force-cache`, `Next` will first check the `data cache` for a matching request. If there is none or if the match is stale, a new fetch will be made and cached.

`force-cache` does not force a route into dynamic rendering.

- A static route with `force-cache` will remain static. At `build time` `Next` will check the cache or make a new fetch and cache it. It then prerenders the `html` and `rsc`.
- A dynamic route with `force-cache` will remain dynamic. At `request time` `Next` will check the cache or make a new fetch and cache it. It will render `html` and `rsc` but it won't cache it.

### Recap

- `auto` and `no-store` do not cache fetch results, `force-cache` does.
- `no-store` forces a route into dynamic rendering. `auto` and `force-cache` do not.

## Generated data cache files

A quick word about the actual data cache files. These are on the server (`data cache` is always on the server) in the build folder: `.next/cache/fetch-cache`. Each cached fetch has it's own file and it contains:

- Entire response object
  - headers
  - status
  - body: serialized (bytes)
- Some metadata from `Next`:
  - revalidate
  - tags

Not much more to say about this. It doesn't matter.

I was also wondering how `Next` finds a match inside this cache but it's complicated and in the end it doesn't matter. `Next` knows how to do this and how to check if the data isn't stale. I'm leaving it at that.

## Revalidation

Revalidation lets you renew the cache. In case of the `data cache`, that means refetching the data. For the `full route cache`, that means a fresh static render. There are 2 types of revalidation:

1. Time based: the cache has a lifespan, once the lifespan is reached, a revalidation will be triggered.
2. On-demand: an event triggers revalidation: `revalidatePath`, `updateTag` or `revalidateTag`.

Note that when there is no cache - `auto` and `no-store` - options ... there's nothing to revalidate. If there's no cache, there's nothing to revalidate.

## 1. Time based revalidation

There are 2 ways to set time based revalidation:

1. In the options object of a fetch: `fetch(url, { next: { revalidate: false | 0 | number } })`
2. As a Route Segment option: `export const revalidate = false | 0 | number`

_Note_: setting a route segment allows you to set the behaviour of an entire route. The `Next` docs state that this will be deprecated in the future.

The value of revalidate can be:

- `false`: cache, doesn't expire
- `0`: do not cache
- `number`: cache for x seconds

Some notes:

- `revalidate: 0` is the same as setting the cache option to `no-store`. The data will not be cached + the route will render dynamically.
- when setting `revalidate: 0` via route segment option, read [the docs](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/api-reference/file-conventions/route-segment-config#revalidate). It gets weird.
- The options object can override the route segment option. (again, see docs)

Just try to stay away from the route segment option.

### Cache Invalidation Strategy: `stale while revalidate`

Time-based revalidation uses the cache invalidation strategy `stale while revalidate`. This means that when a revalidation is triggered (f.e. lifespan expired), the data will be marked as stale but will **not** immeditiately update.

Let's say we have data that expired. User `Bob` makes a request for this data. `Next` reacts:

1. Checks the cache, finds match and sees it's expired.
2. Serves `Bob` the current (stale) data.
3. In the background, refetch data, update `data cache` and `full route cache` if required.

The next User makes a request and receives 'fresh' data from cache.

The advantage of using `stale while revalidate` is that requests are answered really fast (from cache) and require low server load. The disadvantage is that the first request will receive stale data. Isn't this bad? No, because in case the user should never receive stale data, you wouldn't use this caching strategy. Only use this when the one user receiving stale data doesn't really matter.

### Combining cache option with revalidate option

Cache option `auto` doesn't cache. However, when setting `revalidate: number | false` with no explicit cache option, then the fetch will be equivalent to cache option `force cache`.

```tsx
fetch(url, { next: { revalidate: 60 } });
```

So, the above isn't a cache `auto` anymore. Because it will create a cache.

Also, some combo's are absurd. For example setting `no-store` (don't cache) + `revalidate: false` (cache indefinitly) is ridiculous. `eslint` doesn't catch this but `Next` does. It throws a warning in dev mode: ` ⚠ Specified "cache: no-store" and "revalidate: false", only one should be specified.` and ignores both.

You're probably feeling a bit bewildered again while reading this, I know I am. Too many options. Here's some advice. Try not to combine cache option and revalidate options.

- Don't use `revalidate: false`, use `force-cache`.
- Don't use `revalidate: 0`, use `no-store`.
- When using `revalidate: number`, don't use the cache options.
- Avoid using route segment options.

This will leave you with a limited number of combo's:

```tsx
fetch(url); // auto: no data cache
fetch(url, { cache: 'no-store' }); // don't data cache + dynamic routes
fetch(url, { cache: 'force-cache' }); // do data cache, don't expire
fetch(url, { next: { revalidate: 60 } }); // data cache for certain period
```

Note, there is one more option here, `ISR`. We will cover this later.

## 2. On demand revalidation

3 functions can trigger revalidation on demand:

1. `revalidatePath`
2. `revalidateTag`
3. `updateTag`

These only work `server-side`:

- In a route handler (route.ts): f.e. called by a CMS webhook.
- In a server action: after a user event like form submit or clicking a refresh button.

### 2.1 RevalidatePath

`revalidatePath` invalidates cached data for a specific path: `data cache` and `full route cache` is present.

The path can be a specific url `revalidatePath('/blog/a')`, a route handler (`route.ts`) but also a route pattern: `revalidatePath('/blog/[postSlug]', 'page')`. Note the second parameter type ('layout' | 'page'). When revalidating a route pattern, the second parameter is required.

This type parameter changes what is revalidated. Imagine this route setup:

```
app
  layout.tsx
  blog
    [postSlug]
      page.tsx
```

When calling `revalidatePath('/blog/a')`, the root `layout.ts` will not be revalidated. This is the same as calling `revalidatePath('/blog/a', 'page')`:

```ts
revalidatePath('/blog/a');
// same as
revalidatePath('/blog/a', 'page');
```

If contents of `layout.tsx` also needs to be revalidated, use type parameter 'layout':

```tsx
revalidatePath('/blog/a', 'layout');
```

But beware, this will revalidate all path that use `layout.tsx`, nested paths aswell, f.e. `/blog/author/[slug]/page.tsx`.

#### Cache invalidation mechanisms

We covered the `stale while revalidate` invalidation mechanism earlier in the time based revalidation section. With on-demand revalidation like `revalidatePath`, things get a bit more complex.

When called from within a `route handler`, `revalidatePath` revalidates using the `stale while revalidate` mechanism. However, when called from inside a `server action`, `revalidatePath` will revalidate using the `read-your-own-writes` mechanism.

**`read-your-own-writes`** purges the cache and immediately updates it. This is best explained with an example. Imagine your app has an edit account page, where a user can for example update their username. This would look like this:

- User edits name and clicks save button.
- This calls a server action that:
  - updates DB
  - triggers on demand revalidation

What does the user expect to see after a succesfull update? Obviously his new username, not his old one (stale data). And that is where `read-your-own-writes` comes into play. Here is how it works:

1. Server action calls on demand revalidation.
2. Affected data is purged from the `data cache` and the `full route cache` if needed.
3. Fresh data is fetched and stored in `data cache`. If needed a new `full route cache` is rendered.
4. The server action responds (like status or something) and the fresh data and rendered route is send along.

So, `read-your-own-writes` will immediately update the cache, `stale while revalidate` does not. Server action are called by user events (form submit, button click). Following this event, the user expects a change in the UI, this is critical.

There is a downside to `read-your-own-writes`. Updating the DB + revalidating the cache takes some time: user has to wait. How do you handle this delay? Either a loading state or the [`useOptimistic` hook](https://react.dev/reference/react/useOptimistic). `stale while revalidate` does not suffer from this delay. It immediately returns data, stale data, but still, no wait.

Ok, now that we know about `read-your-own-writes`, let's return to `revalidatePath`. When it's called from:

- Route handler -> `stale while revalidate`
- Server action -> `read-your-own-writes`

Why is it fine to have `stale while revalidate` with route handlers? Let's explain by example:

- You made a typo in a blog post.
- You fix it in your headless CMS and save.
- This triggers a webhook that calls an api endpoint in your app.
- In this route handler you call `revalidatePath` for the relevant blog post path (f.e. `/blog/post-a`).

In this flow, there is no link between the event (happens in the CMS, not the app) and the UI of your app. The first user to now visit `/blog/post-a` will still see the stale data (blogpost with typo). In the background, `Next` will refetch and rerender and serve the updated content to the next user. This is fine, it's not critical.

It could be critical. For example a typo in the price of a product. You want that updated ASAP. But, this would require a different caching strategy. For a blog post, it's fine. I hope this makes sense, it all depends on the context.

#### Other limitations

`revalidatePath` revalidates everything in the path. So, when there are multiple fetches, they will all be revalidated. This might not be desirable. If not, use a different caching strategy.

There is another limitation the docs describe. Let's say we have this tagged fetch (we cover tags below, but you probably know about them already):

```tsx
fetch(url, { next: { tag: ['product-a'] } });
```

And we use them in 2 places `products/a` and `products/promos`. These 2 routes are statically rendered, that is prerended `html` and `rsc`. We update `products/a` with `revalidateTag`. This will update the `data cache` (the fetch with tag 'product-a') and the `full route cache`: `.next/server/app/products/a.html` and `.next/server/app/products/a.rsc`.

However, the prerendered `products/promos` page will not be revalidated. The `data cache` got updated but the prerendered route will show stale data! And that's a problem you can't fix. This is a big limition on using `revalidateTag`.

#### Conclusion

`revalidatePath` is a good solution for simple pages. Avoid it in more complex situations. There are limited ways to call it:

```js
// specific url
revalidatePath('/blog/a');
// same as
revalidatePath('/blog/a', 'page'); // 'page' optional
// route pattern
revalidatePath('/blog/[postSlug]', 'layout'); // type parameter required: page | layout
// route handler
revalidatePath('/api/revalidate');
```

`revalidatePath` behaves differently depending on context:

- Route handler -> `stale while revalidate`
- Server action -> `read-your-own-writes`

Let's also take a step back here, to get a good overview. Since we're revalidating, there's a `data cache`. The page can be dynamic or static. If it's static then there will be a `full route cache`. Calling `revalidatePath` will revalidate the `data cache` and the `full route cache` (for that path).

### 2.2 and 2.3 revalidateTag & updateTag

> `revalidateTag` allows you to invalidate cached data on-demand for a specific cache tag.
>
> `updateTag` allows you to update cached data on-demand for a specific cache tag from within Server Actions.

#### Create a tag

A cache tag (`string[]`) is a tag you add to a data fetch:

```tsx
fetch(url, { next: { tag: ['posts', 'post-a'] } });
```

Note, there is a second option to create a tag: `cacheTag`. We will cover this in a later chapter.

Tagging a fetch will add the data to the `data cache` with said tag(s). You can then call `revalidateTag` or `updateTag` to revalidate or update the data.

#### updateTag

```ts
updateTag(tag: string): void;
```

- Takes one argument: a single tag.
- Can only be called from `server actions`.
- Revalidates data as `read-your-own-writes`.

#### revalidateTag

```ts
revalidateTag(tag: string, profile: string | { expire?: number }): void;
```

- First argument: a single tag.
- Second argument profile: 'max' or { expire: 0 }
- Use it in `route handlers`.
- Don't use it in `server actions` (you can, but don't, use `updateTag`).

`revalidateTag` is a bit weird because it's in flux. `updateTag` took over some of it's functionality but `revalidateTag` can also still do it.

About the second argument. Carefully consider what you need. When `stale while revalidate` is acceptable, use 'max'. When you want `read-your-own-writes`, use { expire: 0 }:

```tsx
// inside route handler
revalidateTag('post-a', 'max'); // -> SWR
revalidateTag('post-a', { expires: 0 }); // -> DYOR
```

So, `revalidateTag` can do both. `revalidatePath` from earlier can only do `stale while revalidate`.

#### Full route cache

At this point, we've only handled revalidation of the `data cache`. But how do `updateTag` and `revalidateTag` influence statically rendered routes (`full route cache`)? The short answer is as expected.

1. When calling `updateTag` from a `server action`, `Next` will update the `data cache` and the cached route the server action was called from (if the route was cached). So, it will make a new static render for this route.

But, what if multiple routes use the affected cache tag? I'm not 100% sure on this but it seems that `Next` will mark them as stale or expired or even purges them. But the result is this: when a user visits one of these 'other' routes, the route will be freshly statically rendered. But, only at `request time`. Calling `updateTag` will not prerender all affected routes. That would be too heavy on the server and also slow.

This is a bit like ISR, but we haven't covered that yet. Other routes should be freshly prerendered when they are static. This is as expected in `read-your-own-writes`. You wouldn't for example want a user to suddenly see his old username again on a stale page after he just updated it. Note, all of this isn't necessairy in dynamic routes because these are always freshly rendered at `request time` (no cache).

2. When calling `revalidateTag(tag, { expire: 0 })` from a `route handler` (`read-your-own-writes`), there is no "event route". We talked about this, a revalidation route handler will most likely get called from a webhook, external to your app. So, there's no route in your app associated with this call, unlike the server action calling `updateTag`. But, we still requested an immidiate cache update (`{ expire: 0 }`).

As we've seen, the `data cache` will be updated. `Next` will also be aware of all statically rendered routes affected by this `data cache` update. Again, not 100% sure about this, but I think it behaves similarly as the "other routes" in the previous example. All affected `full route cache` will be be marked expired or purged (not sure). On request, `Next` will freshly, statically render these routes.

Again, this is expected. For example, you wouldn't want an old price to be still in a route somewhere when you updated it in your CMS.

3. When calling `revalidateTag(tag, "max")` from a `route handler` (`stale while revalidate`), `Next` will update the `data cache`. Any statically rendered routes that "depend" on the cache tag, will be marked as stale but not immidiately updated. So, when a user visits any static route affected by `revalidateTag`, this user will receive stale content while `Next` will statically render the route and put it in `full route cache`. Only the next user will receive the fresh content (from `full route cache`). So, this is as expected when using `stale while revalidate`.

## Big recap

This was a long chapter and we covered a lot of info. Let's do a slow recap. We talked about the `data cache`, that is results from fetches are saved and can be reused.

We set a `data cache` by adding an options object to the cache. In the end you only need 5 combo's:

```ts
fetch(url); // auto option: no data cache
fetch(url, { cache: 'no-store' }); // don't data cache + dynamic routes
fetch(url, { cache: 'force-cache' }); // do data cache, don't expire
fetch(url, { next: { revalidate: 60 } }); // data cache for certain period
fetch(url, { next: { tag: ['tag'] } }); // cache tag
```

| Option          | caches data | forces dynamic render |
| --------------- | ----------- | --------------------- |
| auto            | no          | no                    |
| no-store        | no          | yes                   |
| force-cache     | yes         | no                    |
| next.revalidate | yes         | no                    |
| next.tag        | yes         | no                    |

There is also the route segment option: `export const revalidate = false | 0 | number`. But it can be tricky.

Now that we have a cache, we can look into revalidating it. There are 2 possibilities: time-base or on-demand revalidation.

Time-based revalidation is set via the `next.revalidate` fetch option (or route segment). It invalidates cache via the `stale while revalidate` mechanism. When expired, both `data cache` and `full route cache` will still be served to the user while `Next` updates in the background.

You can demand revalidation using 3 functions: `revalidatePath`, `revalidateTag` and `updateTag`.

1. `revalidatePath` revalidates the cache for a given path. Use it for less complex routes. It can only be called in a limited number of ways:

```ts
// specific url
revalidatePath('/blog/a');
// same as
revalidatePath('/blog/a', 'page'); // 'page' optional
// route pattern
revalidatePath('/blog/[postSlug]', 'layout'); // type parameter required: page | layout
// route handler
revalidatePath('/api/revalidate');
```

When called from inside a route handler it will revalidate as `stale while revalidate`. When called from a `server action` is will revalidate as `read-your-own-writes`. This means that the cache will be purged and immediately updated. It updates:

- Affected `data cache`.
- The targeted route in `full route cache`.

2. `revalidateTag` invalidates a cache tag. Only call if from inside a `route handler`.

```ts
revalidateTag('tag', 'max'); // -> stale while revalidate
revalidateTag('tag', { expire: 0 }); // -> read-your-own-writes
```

Depending on the second parameter ("max" or "{ expire: 0 }"), it will also update all affected routes in the `full route cache` as `stale while revalidate` or `read-your-own-writes`.

3. `updateTag` invalidates a cache tag. Only call it from a `server action`. Invalidates cache tag and all affected routes in the `full route cache` as `read-your-own-writes`. However, only the route the `server action` was called from will immediately be statically rerendered. Other affected routes will only be statically rerendered at `request time`.

## Some notes

- The `Next` docs explicitely mention that if fine to call both `revalidatePath` and `updateTag` together to ensure data consistency.
- Caching and revalidation works completely different in development mode, so be carefull.
- There is a nucleair option using `revalidatePath`: `revalidatePath('/', 'layout')`. These will revalidate **everything**. If you're using it, you're probably doing something wrong.

We continue with caching in the next chapter.
