# Full route cache

client components added to client bundle

useSearchParams

where is full route cache, server only, not client

-

// note, server components never on client

// test usePathname and useParams
generateParams

## Why

Why do we need static rendering? What's the point. We know what it is, but why do we need it? Gemini came up with a pretty good answer:

> ⚡ Blazing Speed (Performance): Because the HTML is pre-generated, it can be stored on a CDN (Content Delivery Network). This means when a user visits your site, the file is sent from a server physically close to them. There is no waiting for database queries or server-side logic.
>
> 🔍 Superior SEO: Search engine crawlers love static HTML. Since the content is already there the moment the bot "looks" at the page (no waiting for JavaScript to load), your site is much easier to index, which can lead to higher search rankings.
>
> 🛡️ Enhanced Security: Static files are just text. By reducing the amount of "live" code running on a server for every request, you significantly shrink the "attack surface" for hackers. There's no database to inject or server process to exploit on that specific request.
>
> 💸 Lower Costs & Scalability: Serving static files requires very little "compute" power. Your server won't break a sweat (or your budget) if you suddenly get 100,000 visitors, because you're just handing out pre-made files rather than building 100,000 pages from scratch.

I'm gonna leave it at that.

## Tricky

When `Next` detects a dynamic element in a route on `build time` then the route will be marked as to be rendered dynamically.

Whenever possible, you ought to use static rendering (see reasons above). But, in a complex project, it's not always obvious that somewhere nested lies a _dynamic_ component.

On top of that, caching tends to work differently in dev mode then it does in production. So it's not something you would easily catch. So you need to keep your witts up during development and verify static rendering in the build logs.

That is why it's important to have a solid understanding how commonly used elements are rendered. For example, can you quickly answer following questions:

- Can a client component with `useContext` and `useParams` be rendered statically?
- Can an async server component with `suspense` be rendered statically?

We've been using simple components thusfar. This served us well to explain static rendering but left us poorly prepared to answer previous questions. Let's work on that.

## Hooks and interactivity

We create a new static route:

```tsx
// app/hooks-and-interactivity/page.tsx

export default function page() {
  return (
    <>
      <Header />
      <Main />
      <Footer />
      <HooksAndInteractivity />
    </>
  );
}
```

And this is our `<HooksAndInteractivity />` component:

```tsx
'use client';

import { useState, useEffect } from 'react';

export default function HooksAndInteractivity() {
  const [count, setCount] = useState(100);
  function handleCount() {
    setCount((prev) => prev + 1);
  }
  useEffect(() => {
    document.title = '*** My hooks and interactivity page ***';
  });
  return (
    <div>
      <div>*** count: {count} ***</div>
      <button
        onClick={handleCount}
        className='bg-amber-500 rounded px-2 py-1 text-black'
      >
        add one
      </button>
    </div>
  );
}
```

We do 3 things in this component:

- `useState` state hook
- `useEffect` lifecycle hook
- We add an event listener to a button. (interactivity)

What will happen when we `run build`? This is a static route. We saw a very similar example in the previous chapter.

```
run build
```

Firstly, the build log confirms that this was static route:

```
○ /hooks-and-interactivity

○  (Static)   prerendered as static content
```

From before, we know that `Next` generated `html` to serve on `initial load` and `React Server Component payload (rsc)` for `client side navigation`. But what about our client component?

### HTML for initial load

Here is a cleaned up version of the prerendered html:

```html
<!doctype html>
<!--Fr8NtaoRQ_QQgfejMOimC-->
<html lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Caching in NextJS: examples</title>
  </head>
  <body
    class="geist_a71539c9-module__T19VSG__variable geist_mono_8d43a2aa-module__8Li5zG__variable antialiased p-4"
  >
    <header>***** header *****</header>
    <main>***** main *****</main>
    <footer>***** footer *****</footer>
    <div>
      <div>
        *** count:
        <!-- -->100<!-- -->
        ***
      </div>
      <button class="bg-amber-500 rounded px-2 py-1 text-black">add one</button>
    </div>
    <!--$--><!--/$-->
  </body>
</html>
```

We initiated `useState`: `const [count, setCount] = useState(100);` and that value is present:

```html
<div>
  *** count:
  <!-- -->100<!-- -->
  ***
</div>
```

As expected, `useEffect` did not run. `useEffect` only runs in the browser. This means that we do NOT get the updated title: `document.title = '*** My hooks and interactivity page ***';`. Lastly, we have a button but there is not event listener attached. Again, as expected. Hydration only happens in the browser.

So, our client component was succesfully rendered into a static HTML shell. Somewhere in all the prerended bundles, the code lies that will handle `hydration` and `useEffect` and `useState`. This is pretty much as expected. We won't be looking into this prerendered js, there's no point.

The static prerendering of html is mostly the same between client component (`<HooksAndInteractivity />`) and server components (`<Header />`, `<Main />` and `<Footer />`). Client components just have some extra JavaScript that needs to be hydrated.

## rsc for client-side navigation???

The actual client component will be compiled into JavaScript. Note, it **will not** be prerendered. **No** client payload or html or something. It will be compiled into a JavaScript version of a `React` component. Still a component, not rendered. Compiled into js chunks. These chunks are part of the `Full Route Cache` (static rendering).

On static rendering, these chunks are added to the bundles that are sent over to the browser on `initial load`. For dynamic rendering

When checking the prerendered `hooks-and-interactivity.rsc` we find our server component content as before (f.e. `{"children":"***** footer *****"}`) but no client component: no `*** count` string to be found.

What happens with client components? Where server components get `rsc`, client components get something similar. They get compiled into JavaScript chunks. These chunks get sent over to the browser.

works differently in dev mode

limited use
be carefull, test this

server cache
update cache and ISR
why caching
more complex examples with client and server components
data fetching
other data in cache, dif page route
`useSearchParams` weird behaviour

no dynamic
revalidate

why?

## dynamic rendering

** where static? server side?
** where dynamic

static and dynamic in dev mode?
useSearchParams
