# Incremental Static Regeneration (ISR)

We know about static and dynamic rendering. Route are dynamically rendered when there is a dynamic element: `headers`, `cookies`, `connection`, searchParams prop, a dynamic fetch (no-store). Every other route is statically rendered and becomes the `full route cache`. Static rendering happens at `build time`. Dynamic rendering happens `server-side` at `request time`.

But, there is an in between mode: Incremental Static Regeneration (ISR). This let's you add routes in the `full route cache` after it has been build and is already running on the server.

## An example

It's best explained using an example. Let's say you have a blog app. At the time you deploy it, there are 5 (statically rendered) blog posts. You put it live, in production. When deploying the app on the server it will first run a build (`next build`) and then start up (`next start`).

How do you add content? You wrote another blogpost in your CMS and publish. What now? You want a statically generated post but how do you get it on the server? A redeploy with a new build?

Maybe your CMS calls a webhook on publish. You catch that in a route handler and call ... what exactly? You can't use `revalidatePath` because there is no path (the post doesn't exist in your app). `revalidateTag('post-6', "max")` maybe? No, there is no cache tag for tag 'post-6'. So, that's our problem, we need to add prerendered routes.

We set up a blog example: a blog home page and then posts in a dynamic route segment ([slug]). I don't want to setup an actual CMS so we'll cheat a bit and use jsonplaceholder API.

```
app
  blog
    page.tsx
    [id]
      page.tsx
```

This is our blog home page.

```tsx
// app/blog/page.tsx

import Link from 'next/link';

export type PostT = {
  id: number;
  title: string;
  body: string;
};

export async function getPosts() {
  const data = await fetch('https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts');
  const posts: PostT[] = await data.json(); // 100 posts
  return posts.slice(0, 5); // return 5 posts
}

export default async function BlogHome() {
  const posts = await getPosts(); // 5 posts
  return (
    <div>
      <h1 className='text-xl font-bold mb-2'>Blog</h1>
      <ol className='list-inside list-decimal'>
        {posts.map((post) => (
          <li key={post.id}>
            <Link href={`/blog/${post.id}`} className='underline text-blue-500'>
              {post.title}
            </Link>
          </li>
        ))}
        <li>
          <Link href={`/blog/6`} className='underline text-blue-500'>
            post 6
          </Link>
        </li>
      </ol>
    </div>
  );
}
```

Quick overview: We're trying to simulate that we have a CMS that returns 5 posts. So, we take the 100 posts that [jsonplaceholder api](https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts) returns and only use the first 5. We then render these 5 posts out as links to invididual blog posts. Finally, I manually added a 6th link. We will need this in a bit to run some tests. Also note I use id's in the url, simpler then using slugs in this example.

```tsx
<li>
  <Link href={`/blog/6`} className='underline text-blue-500'>
    post 6
  </Link>
</li>
```

Here is our dynamic route segment (f.e. `/blog/1`):

```tsx
// app/blog/[id]/page.tsx

import Post from '@/components/blog/Post';
import { getPosts } from '../page';

export async function generateStaticParams() {
  const posts = await getPosts();
  return posts.map((post) => ({ id: post.id.toString() }));
}

export const dynamicParams = false; // true | false

export default async function page({ params }: PageProps<'/blog/[id]'>) {
  const { id } = await params;
  return <Post id={id} />;
}
```

You probably are familiar with dynamic route segments but here's a quick recap. We want to statically render this route (`/blog/[id]/page.tsx`). To let `Next` know what the id is, we use `generateStaticParams`. This returns an array of the id's we have for our 5 posts:

```tsx
[
  { id: 1 },
  { id: 2 },
  //...
];
```

This enables `Next` to statically render these 5 posts at `build time`. Note the `export const dynamicParams = false;`. This actually disables ISR, more later. Finally, we actually render the post content in a `<Post />` component. It makes a fetch for a single post with given id and prints out title and content.

```tsx
// components/blog/Post.tsx

import { PostT } from '@/app/blog/page';
import Link from 'next/link';

type Props = {
  id: string;
};

export async function getPost(id: string) {
  const data = await fetch(`https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts/${id}`);
  const post: PostT = await data.json();
  return post;
}

export default async function Post({ id }: Props) {
  const post = await getPost(id);
  return (
    <div>
      <h1 className='text-xl font-bold mb-2'>{post.title}</h1>
      <p>{post.body}</p>
      <Link href='/blog' className='text-blue-400 underline block mt-4'>
        back
      </Link>
    </div>
  );
}
```

## Run build

So, we have our setup. Let's now see what happens when we run `next build`:

```
├ ○ /blog
├ ● /blog/[id]
│ ├ /blog/1
│ ├ /blog/2
│ ├ /blog/3
│ └ [+2 more paths]

○  (Static)   prerendered as static content
●  (SSG)      prerendered as static HTML (uses generateStaticParams)
ƒ  (Dynamic)  server-rendered on demand
```

The build log confirms what we expected, the blog home and all the individual posts were rendered statically. Note that `Next` makes a difference between Static and SSG.

As we did earlier, let's also take a look at the `.next` build folder. We find the following files:

```
.next
  server
    app
      blog.html
      rsc.html
      blog
        1.html
        1.rsc
        ...
        5.html
        5.rsc
```

So, for each of our 6 pages, an `html` and `.src` file were created. This is what we expect from static rendering.

## next start

Let's now run `next start` and run locally in production mode. The page `http://localhost:3000/blog` is as expected. 5 generated links and 1 hard coded link. The 5 generated links work properly and lead to the relevant posts. Clicking the hardcoded link to `/blog/6` (that doesn't exist in our prerendered build) leads us to a 404 not found page. This is as expected.

Now, we go bach to the dynamic route segment (`/blog/[id]/page.tsx`) and change the route segment option `dynamicParams` to true. Note, true is the default value, so we could omit it:

```tsx
export const dynamicParams = true; // true | false
// same as
// export const dynamicParams = true; // true | false
```

And then `run build` and `run start` again. The build log was the same and everything works as before expect the `blog/6` link. That no longer leads to a 404 but to an actual blog post:

```html
<!-- http://localhost:3000/blog/6 -->
<div>
  <h1 class="text-xl font-bold mb-2">dolorem eum magni eos aperiam quia</h1>
  <p>
    ut aspernatur corporis harum nihil quis provident sequi mollitia nobis
    aliquid molestiae perspiciatis et ea nemo ab reprehenderit accusantium quas
    voluptate dolores velit et doloremque molestiae
  </p>
  <a class="text-blue-400 underline block mt-4" href="/blog">back</a>
</div>
```

This is great, we were able to create a new page. But there is something else to see here. Our `.next` build folder now contains `6.html` and `6.rsc`.

```
.next\server\app\blog\6.html
.next\server\app\blog\6.rsc
```

This is incremental static regeneration. We added a route to the `full route cache`, not at `build time` but at `request time`. This prerendered route will now be served to all users. Once again, a user made a request to a route that was not prerendered. `Next` then freshly rendered the route - `server-side` at `request time` and added it to our `full route cache`.

## Some improvements

Because we aren't working with an actual CMS I left some things out.

### Blog home

On our blog home page, we made a fetch with no caching option - the `auto` option. That means no data cache was created and no revalidation can happen. But, when we publish our post 6, revalidation is needed. So we should update our fetch with revalidation options. Which one? That depends.

**A time based revalidation** `fetch(url, { revalidate: 360 })` would work fine. The `data cache` has a lifespan of an hour. A request beyond an hour would then trigger SWR revalidation. So, the request would receive stale data while `Next` updates the `data cache` and `full route cache`. So, had we published our post 6, it would then show on the blog home page.

An extra benefit: we used `getPosts` inside our blog home page and inside `generateStaticParams` in our dynamic route segment (`/blog/[id]/page.tsx`). Since we now cache the fetch, we wouldn't have to fetch twice - at `build time`.

Carefull, there is a gotcha here. Suppose our `getPosts` fetch got revalidated and now also has post 6, would that update our `full route cache` with post 6 (`6.html` and `6.rsc`)? The answer is no.

What enabled prerendering our 5 blogposts at **`build time`** was the `generateStaticParams` function. It gave `Next` the info it needed: we need to generate 5 routes with following dynamic params: `[{ id: 1 }, { id: 2 }, ...]`. But, `generateStaticParams` only runs at build time.

So, when we revalidated `getPosts` fetch it won't generate a new route for post 6 because there is no way for `Next` to know about this. `Next` will generate it when it receives a `request`: it will render the route and add it to `full route cache`.

Aside from `time-based` revalidation, **`on-demand` revalidation** would also work. If your CMS supports webhooks, publishing post 6 would call this webhook, you'd catch it in a route handler and maybe call `revalidatePath('/blog', 'max');` or `revalidateTag` combined with a tagged fetch.

Note, again this will not generate the actual `blog/6` route. Only a `request` to this page will do that. Do not try to call something like `revalidatePath('/blog/6', 'max')`. That would not work because that apth doesn't exist yet. This should make sense.

### Blog post

Using ISR, we added post 6 to our full route cache. But, maybe we also updated post 5 because we wrote a typo. So we should really allow for revalidation of our posts aswell. How depends. Maybe time based, maybe on demand. Determine what you need and find a suitable solution.

### ISR setup

`Next` allows ISR by default. This has some consequences. What if we visit `blog/foobar`? This should fail. Our fetch `getPost` wouldn't return a post but + depending on the CMS - something empty or an error. Our `<Post />` component would then crash trying to render this out as a post. To solve this, check data and use [`notFound()`](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/api-reference/functions/not-found).

```ts
// has post?
if (!post) {
  notFound();
}
```

Also note that when you don't want ISR, you have to turn it off: `export const dynamicParams = false`. This is important cause bots will make weird requests.

## `read-your-own-writes` mechanism

In the previous chapter on `data cache` we talked about `read-your-own-writes` revalidation mechanism and how it will purge the `full route cache` of all affected routes in some specific cases.

For example, when calling `updateTag` from a `server action`, different statically rendered routes may be affected. But, only the route the `server action` was called from will immediately be updated. These other routes will be purged from the `full route cache` but not immidiately updated. They will be regenerated at `request time` and then added to the cache.

That sounds a lot like ISR mechanic but I can't confirm this. Maybe, I just came back to it because we mentioned it in the previous chapter.

## Onwards

So, we learned how to add statically rendered routes to `full route cache`, not at `build time` but at `request time`. This is a very powerfull tool especially when combined with cache invalidation.
