# Revalidation intro

We've covered 2 caches: `data cache` and `full route cache`. In most cases, these need to be updated regularly or once in a while. That is what revalidation does: it let's you update the fetch results - `data cache` - or the statically prerendered routes - `full route cache`. Note that there are 4 combinations here:

|                    | data cache                | no data cache          |
| ------------------ | ------------------------- | ---------------------- |
| **Dynamic render** | data revalidation         | no revalidation needed |
| **Static render**  | data + route revalidation | route revalidation     |

When doing revalidation, we need to keep these combos in mind. But what does revalidation actually do?

**`data cache`** means that the result of a fetch you made was saved. We just talked about the data cache files and what they contained: headers, status, body,... Let's say we made a fetch to our CMS for a blog post with a certain ID. After a while we update this blogpost. However, this did not update our data cache in our app. So the state of our app is no longer up to date with the state of our CMS. Revalidating `data cache` means that we update the `data cache` with fresh data. Simpler said, we refetch the data and save it in cache (overwrite). How we actually do this is for the next chapter.

**`Full route cache`** are all the routes that were statically prerendered at `build time`. Each route gets `.html` and `.rsc` files (and css and js, ...), we covered this in previous chapters. We just _updated a blog post_. If that blogpost was statically rendered, it's now no longer up to data. Revalidating `full route cache` means that we regenerate outdated routes. We rerender them into fresh `html` and `rsc`.

- We regenerate -> Regeneration
- The static routes -> Static Regeneration
- But only parts, we don't rebuild the whole thing -> Incremental

The process of updating or refreshing the `full route cache` without rebuilding your entire project (no `next build`) is called **Incremental Static Regeneration** (ISR). Whenever we talk about rerendering or updating or refreshing or regenerating a statically rendered route, that is ISR!

Once more. We generated the `full route cache` at build time and started started our server (`next start`). `Incremental Static Regeneration` is a mechanism that allows to update these prerendered routes, not at `build time` but at `run time`. The routes are statically rendered again, `server-side`. We don't rebuild the whole cache, only certain parts (routes). `revalidation` tells us which parts to regenerate.

Revalidation in `Next` is updating stale cache. There are 2 types of revalidation:

1. Time based revalidation
2. On demand revalidation

These are both mechanisms to update stale cache. They do the same thing but do it differently. We cover this in the next chapters.
