# Incremental Static Regeneration (ISR)

We talked about `incremental static regeneration` before, it's when a statically rendered route is updated without having to rebuild it. It updates, `server-side` at `runtime`. But that is updating existing routes. ISR has an extra trick. You can also add new routes to the `full route cache`.

## An example

It's best explained using an example. Let's say you have a blog app. At the time you deploy it, there are 5 (statically rendered) blog posts. You put it live, in production. When deploying the app on the server it will first run a build (`next build`) and then start up (`next start`).

How do you add content? You wrote another blogpost in your CMS and publish. What now? You want a statically generated post but how do you get it on the server? A redeploy with a new build?

Maybe your CMS calls a webhook on publish. You catch that in a route handler and call ... what exactly? You can't use `revalidatePath` because there is no path (the post doesn't exist in your app). `revalidateTag('post-6', "max")` maybe? No, there is no cache tag for tag 'post-6'. So, that's our problem, we need to add prerendered routes.

We set up a blog example: a blog home page and then posts in a dynamic route segment ([slug]).

```
app
  blog
    page.tsx
    [id]
      page.tsx
```

This is our blog home page.

```tsx
// app/blog/page.tsx

import Link from 'next/link';

export type PostT = {
  id: number;
  title: string;
  body: string;
};

export async function getPosts() {
  const data = await fetch('https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts');
  const posts: PostT[] = await data.json(); // 100 posts
  return posts.slice(0, 5); // return 5 posts
}

export default async function BlogHome() {
  const posts = await getPosts(); // 5 posts
  return (
    <div>
      <h1 className='text-xl font-bold mb-2'>Blog</h1>
      <ol className='list-inside list-decimal'>
        {posts.map((post) => (
          <li key={post.id}>
            <Link href={`/blog/${post.id}`} className='underline text-blue-500'>
              {post.title}
            </Link>
          </li>
        ))}
        <li>
          <Link href={`/blog/6`} className='underline text-blue-500'>
            post 6
          </Link>
        </li>
      </ol>
    </div>
  );
}
```

Quick overview: We're trying to simulate that we have a CMS that returns 5 posts. So, we take the 100 posts that [jsonplaceholder api](https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts) returns and only use the first 5. We then render these 5 posts out as links to invididual blog posts. Finally, I manually added a 6th link. We will need this in a bit to run some tests. Also note I use id's in the url, easier for this example.

Here is our dynamic route segment (f.e. `/blog/1`):

```tsx
// app/blog/[id]/page.tsx

import SinglePost from '@/components/blog/SinglePost';
import { getPosts } from '../page';

export async function generateStaticParams() {
  const posts = await getPosts();
  return posts.map((post) => ({ id: post.id.toString() }));
}

export const dynamicParams = false;

export default async function page({ params }: PageProps<'/blog/[id]'>) {
  const { id } = await params;
  return <SinglePost id={id} />;
}
```

You probably are familiar with dynamic route segments but here's a quick recap. We want to statically render this route (`/blog/[id]/page.tsx`). To let `Next` know what the id is, we use `generateStaticParams`. This returns an array of the id's we have for our 5 posts:

```tsx
[
  { id: 1 },
  { id: 2 },
  //...
];
```

This enables `Next` to statically render these 5 posts at `build time`. Note the `export const dynamicParams = false;`. This actually disables ISR, more later. Finally, we render the post content in a `<SinglePost />` component. It makes a fetch for a single post with given id and prints out title and content.

```tsx
// components/blog/Post.tsx

import { PostT } from '@/app/blog/page';
import Link from 'next/link';

type Props = {
  id: string;
};

export async function getPost(id: string) {
  const data = await fetch(`https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts/${id}`);
  const post: PostT = await data.json();
  return post;
}

export default async function SinglePost({ id }: Props) {
  const post = await getPost(id);
  return (
    <div>
      <h1 className='text-xl font-bold mb-2'>{post.title}</h1>
      <p>{post.body}</p>
      <Link href='/blog' className='text-blue-400 underline block mt-4'>
        back
      </Link>
    </div>
  );
}
```

## Run build

So, we have our setup. Let's now see what happens when we run `next build`:

```
├ ○ /blog
├ ● /blog/[id]
│ ├ /blog/1
│ ├ /blog/2
│ ├ /blog/3
│ └ [+2 more paths]

○  (Static)   prerendered as static content
●  (SSG)      prerendered as static HTML (uses generateStaticParams)
ƒ  (Dynamic)  server-rendered on demand
```

The build log confirms what we expected, the blog home and all the individual posts were rendered statically. Note that `Next` makes a difference between Static and SSG.

As we did earlier, let's also take a look at the `.next` build folder. We find the following files:

```
.next
  server
    app
      blog.html
      rsc.html
      blog
        1.html
        1.rsc
        ...
        5.html
        5.rsc
```

So, for each of our 6 pages, an `html` and `.src` file were created. This is what we expect from static rendering.

## next start

Let's now run `next start` and run locally in production mode. The page `http://localhost:3000/blog` is as expected. 5 generated links and 1 hard coded link. The 5 generated links work properly and lead to the relevant posts. Clicking the hardcoded link to `/blog/6` (that doesn't exist in our prerendered build) leads us to a 404 not found page. This is as expected.

Now, we go bach to the dynamic route segment (`/blog/[id]/page.tsx`) and change the route segment option `dynamicParams` to true. Note, true is the default value, so we could omit it:

```tsx
export const dynamicParams = true; // true | false
// same as
// export const dynamicParams = true; // true | false
```

And then `run build` and `run start` again. The build log was the same and everything works as before expect the `blog/6` link. That no longer leads to a 404 but to an actual blog post:

```html
<!-- http://localhost:3000/blog/6 -->
<div>
  <h1 class="text-xl font-bold mb-2">dolorem eum magni eos aperiam quia</h1>
  <p>
    ut aspernatur corporis harum nihil quis provident sequi mollitia nobis
    aliquid molestiae perspiciatis et ea nemo ab reprehenderit accusantium quas
    voluptate dolores velit et doloremque molestiae
  </p>
  <a class="text-blue-400 underline block mt-4" href="/blog">back</a>
</div>
```

This is great, we were able to create a new page. But there is something else to see here. Our `.next` build folder now contains `6.html` and `6.rsc`.

```
.next\server\app\blog\6.html
.next\server\app\blog\6.rsc
```

This is an extra function of incremental static regeneration. We added a route to the `full route cache`, not at `build time` but at `request time`. This prerendered route will now be served to all users. Once again, a user made a request to a route that was not prerendered. `Next` then freshly rendered the route - `server-side` at `request time` and added it to our `full route cache`. So, ISR allows us to add content to the `full route cache` at `runtime`. And that is awesome!

## Some improvements

I want to take the rest of the chapter as an opportunity to apply some of the things we learned about caching thusfar.

### Blog home

On our blog home page, we made a fetch with no caching option - the `auto` option. That means no data cache was created. `Next` made a fetch, used it to generate `html` and `rsc` but did not cache the fetch. In a real project, that would be a problem: when we publish a new blogpost, we would like it to appear on our home page.How would we solve this?

1. We could make the blog homepage dynamic and set no-store to the fetch. Every request to the blog home page would generate a fresh result. It would work.
2. `revalidatePath` or `revalidateTag` could work. CMS (publish post) -> webhook -> route handler -> `revalidatePath('/app/blog')` or `revalidateTag(posts)`. The path or data becomes stale, `Next` regenerates, refetches `getPosts()` and we have a link to our new blog post.
3. Time based revalidation could also work, f.e. `fetch('https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts', { revalidate: 360 })`. Every hour the data becomes stale and a new request will trigger a revalidation. Result: our new link appears.

Any form of caching on the posts fetch would have another benefit. We used `getPosts` inside our blog home page but also inside `generateStaticParams` in our dynamic route segment (`/blog/[id]/page.tsx`). This means that at `build time`, `Next` only fetched it once and used the `data cache` for the second one.

### Blog post

So, ISR allows us to add content to our `full route cache` and to update our `full route cache`. Right now, we don't have that functionality in our post. If we wrote a typo for example, there is no way to fix it. We need revalidation.

How? Depends, you know the options: time based or on demand revalidation. Determine what you need and find a suitable solution.

### ISR setup

`Next` allows ISR by default. This has some consequences. What if we visit `blog/foobar`? This should fail. Our fetch `getPost` wouldn't return a post but - depending on the CMS - something empty or an error. Our `<SinglePost />` component would then crash trying to render this out as a post. To solve this, check data and use [`notFound()`](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/api-reference/functions/not-found).

```ts
// has post?
if (!post) {
  notFound();
}
```

Also note that when you don't want ISR, you have to turn it off: `export const dynamicParams = false`. This is important cause bots will make weird requests.

## Onwards

So, we learned how to add statically rendered routes to `full route cache`, not at `build time` but at `request time`. This is a very powerfull tool especially when combined with cache invalidation.

In the next chapters we learn about other cache mechanisms `Next` provides.
